The year started with a partial unwind of the market euphoria of November and December.
Throughout January the US posted strong economic data. While these new inputs added
further credence to the view that the US is heading for a soft landing, they also pushed back
against hopes that the US Federal Reserve (Fed) will need to ease monetary policy any time
soon. At the end of 2023, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell had guided that rate hikes were likely
behind us and the time for cuts would soon be in sight, leading to an increase in pricing of
cuts at the March FOMC meeting. However, the January FOMC meeting proved more
hawkish than expected with Chairman Powell indicating that a start to the cutting cycle in
March was not their base case scenario. Markets unwound easing expectations accordingly
and the US dollar strengthened versus peers.
In emerging markets, sovereign bond issuance took off with a record start with USD 44.3bn issued via
primary markets in January. The record number marks the highest monthly issuance since the breakout of
the Covid-19 pandemic and follows last years record January issuance. The vast majority of issuance came
from investment grade credits like Saudi Arabia and Mexico, which when combined, accounted for almost
60% of total investment grade issuance. However, the most interesting deal came from high yield issuer Cote
dIvoire who became the first sub-Saharan Africa sovereign issuer in almost two years. The successful
placement opens the doors for other sovereigns who have been waiting in the wings to tap markets, eagerly
waiting for borrowing levels to return to acceptable levels. The likes of Kenya and Angola will be keenly
watched to see if they are able to issue to alleviate near term funding pressures that have built up.
We will be focused on how US data evolves to
understand what the US easing cycle will eventually look
like and when it will begin
Emerging market bonds finished the month weaker in both external and local currency markets. The JP
Morgan EMBI Global Diversified Index (EMBI-GD), which tracks US dollar denominated debt, posted a -1%
return. Investment grade credits were the primary driver behind the underperformance, a combination of
core market repricing and large supply. High yield markets were more supported as risk appetite remained
well contained given the continued equity market outperformance and the successful placement of high yield
primary issuance. The JP Morgan GBI-EM Global Diversified Index (GBI-EM GD), which tracks local currency
denominated debt, returned -1.5% in January. The negative return was primarily driven by the FX component
as strong US data and a hawkish FOMC meeting pushed the US dollar stronger versus peers.
Looking forward, we will be focused on how US data evolves to understand what the US easing cycle will
eventually look like and when it will begin. Across the world, politics will also come increasingly into focus.
In the US, we are set for another polarizing US election, while emerging markets are set for a record number
of elections. December 2023 followed a highly volatile November in which decent total returns were
delivered post the core rates rally that provided significant tailwind to markets. Market
participants proceeded to navigate a highly active schedule of macro data releases in
December, including NFP, CPI, and the FOMC, all within the brief pre-holiday period
spanning only 2.5 weeks, until liquidity declined and market activity slowed. Comments from
Federal Reserve Governor, Christopher Waller, indicating potential rate cuts in Q1 2024
continued to impact markets, offering additional support to global macro and EM credit.
Overall, the Emso Absolute Return portfolios navigated through the December data releases
well, which was largely devoid of big surprises.
The bid for duration remained incredibly strong over December; by the end of the first two weeks, the IG
component of the JP Morgan EMBI-Global Index returned almost 1.5%, with rates accounting for two thirds
of the returns and the remainder from spread compression. The year end culmination by the FOMC around
mid-December resulted in a further rates rally, driving 10-year US treasury yields to 3.8% as the finishing
mark for the year, and substantially boosting emerging market hard currency total returns. The JP Morgan
EMBI-Global Diversified Index (EMBI-GD) returned 4.73% in December with both the IG and HY components
bringing in almost identical return numbers of 4.74% and 4.72% respectively.
January brought a busy month for primary market
activity in EM credit with a record breaking amount of
new issuance
Entering the new calendar year after two outstandingly strong months was by no means going to be an easy
task. Markets had not only seemed to have overshot in the macro landscape by assigning a very decent
probability of rate cuts in March 2024, but there was also little room for spread compression across EM IG
and the bulk of liquid BB rated credits. Further adding to these factors is the seasonality component which
often sees substantial fixed income issuance across both developed and emerging markets. Within the first
few days of January 2024, markets experienced a 25 basis point pullback in core rates, bringing month-to
date returns into negative territory, and by 10 January the EMBI-GD Index had hit the months low at -2.2%.
While markets partially recovered with the rally in rates, the EMBI-GD Index failed to recover to the green,
ending the month at -1.02%.
Assessing bond price changes for liquid EM sovereign curves in the EMBI-GD Index, we find that only
distressed idiosyncratic credits were up on the month and all other benchmark curves were down. Most
notably, bond prices in Ecuador and Pakistan were up around 15% and 8% respectively, on the month, however Argentina, Tunisia, Zambia, and Sri Lanka were all also curves in the green for the month of
January. The Emso Absolute Return portfolios participated in four of these six stories.
Considering how tight the spreads are among higher rated EM issuers, we believe that it is worth adjusting
how we observe the EM fixed income universe. We find that taking the approach of selecting the highest
yielding current issuers in our universe as at end of January 2024, which we view as having a greater chance
of spread compression and total return gains, produces a group of countries that could potentially deliver
good alpha. These countries include (in yield descending order) Pakistan, Egypt, Angola, El Salvador, Kenya,
Nigeria, Senegal, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan. The Emso Absolute Return portfolios have participated in all
these names so far this year.
January brought a busy month for primary market activity in EM credit with a record breaking amount of new
issuance with multi-billion deals from Mexico, Brazil, Ecoperol in Latam, Saudi Arabia and Saudi PIF,
Hungary, Romania, as well as Turkish corporates, and banks in CEEMEA. Indonesia also came to price its
triple tranche bond issue on 4 January totalling USD 2.05 billion, ahead of the upcoming February elections.
As mentioned in this months Overview article above, there was single large and very welcomed event in
January with the primary market reopening for a HY sovereign issuer in Africa after a drought of new
issuance from that region for last two years. The Ivory Coast announced the tender of front-end maturities
in US dollar and Euros and came with a dual tranche USD 2.6 billion deal which traded extremely well on the
break. We regard this as a very welcome change which should lead to greater investor confidence in
prospective deals by the other issuers from the continent after years of difficulties in accessing public
markets. PAKISTAN: METHOD IN THE MADNESS
With Pakistan in the headlines due to its elections, we decide to review the countrys recent
journey back from the brink of default and share our thoughts on the outlook.
2023 began with Pakistan being deeply mired in a confluence of crises: Politically, there was
a high degree of turmoil with Imran Khans government being dissolved after a vote of no
confidence in April 2022. His government was replaced by a fragile coalition government that
faced a popular protest movement as Imran Khans supporters took to the streets.
Economically, the IMF program had stalled since mid-2022 and talks between the fund and
the Finance Ministry were facing an impasse on the issues of raising taxes, currency
devaluation, and subsidy removal. Net FX reserves with the State Bank had whittled down to
USD 3 billion, and inflation was running at 25%. Adding to this, the country was still reeling
from the impact of devastating floods in August 2022. As an indicator of the high probability
of default priced in by the market, by June 2023, Pakistans US dollar denominated bonds
maturing in 2025 were trading at 40 cents on the dollar, which was in line with the levels that
Sri Lankas defaulted debt was trading at the time.
Since the start of 2023, a number of events have helped Pakistan inch back from the brink of default. Firstly,
political stability improved as the army conducted a crackdown on Former Prime Minister Imran Khans
party, which ultimately culminated in Imran Khan and several of his supporters being imprisoned. This
removed the pressure on the government of a protest movement on the streets and also gave creditors
greater visibility on who they would likely be lending to post-election. Secondly, at the end of June 2023, the
IMF approved a new USD 3 billion, 9-month deal instead of simply releasing the final USD 1 billion tranche
under the previous deal. This unlocked funding from other multilaterals, the GCC, and China. Finally, the
elections were delayed allowing a technocratic government six months to deal with the IMF and make painful
fiscal adjustments without having to worry about the political consequences. The technocratic interim
government successfully concluded the first review of the IMF program in November 2023. Moreover, they
have laid the ground for a new, long-term program that the incoming government can sign on to once the
existing program ends in March 2024. While buffers remain thin, FX reserves at the State Bank have
increased from USD 3 billion to USD 8 billion over the course of 2023. As an indicator of improved market
confidence in Pakistans prospects, the aforementioned US dollar denominated bonds maturing in 2025 are
now trading at 88 cents on the dollar.
While the PTI will pursue legal action to contest the
results, we believe that these will languish in the
Pakistani court system
The elections were held on 8 February 2024 on an uneven playing field with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharifs
Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) party as the armys preferred party. Top leadership and activists
from Imran Khans Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party were imprisoned, forcing the party to field
Past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results.
candidates as independents instead of under their party symbol; posing challenges in a country with a 42%
illiteracy rate1 where many voters need to see a symbol in order to know who they are voting for. Despite the
favorable set-up for the PML-N, the PTI voter turnout surprised to the upside and the elections were marred
by accusations of widespread irregularities and vote fixing. While PTI-backed independents won a plurality
of seats, they fell significantly short of a simple majority. After several days of deliberations, the PML-N and
the center-left Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) announced that they would form a coalition government along
with some smaller parties. The unwillingness of the PTI to work with the PML-N and PPP means that they
are likely to sit in opposition. While the PTI will pursue legal action to contest the results, we believe that
these will languish in the Pakistani court system. At the same time the political crackdown on the PTI  has
reduced the risk of a protest movement spiraling out of control, and the response from the US seems to
indicate that they are looking the other way.
We therefore remain constructive on Pakistan over the
next six months as we expect a new long-term IMF
program will be signed by the incoming government
While there may be concerns around the role that former Finance Minister Ishaq Dar may play in the new
administration, the PML-N is a known entity with a pro-business stance. Moreover, while Pakistan has
always had some degree of military influence in its politics, we believe that the army is firmly in control of
the current situation at this juncture. Having undertaken a power grab over the past 12 months and then
having had a technocratic government implement painful fiscal adjustments, including substantial fuel and
energy hikes, we believe that the army is unlikely to let an incoming government squander those gains
immediately. Although Pakistan has a long history of failed IMF programs, we believe that the government
will wait until the country is out of the woods before allowing the IMF program to go off track.
We therefore continue to remain constructive on Pakistan over the next six months as we expect a new long
term IMF program will be signed by the incoming government which will, in turn, unlock funding from others.
We expect the short-term bonds to be paid which should help support the rest of the curve, particularly given
that investor positioning continues to be underweight Pakistan. Pakistans resilience in the face of default is
in part explained by the institutional strength of its army that prevents the country from completely
collapsing and by its geopolitical importance: the international community does not want to see a nuclear
armed country of 230 million people default and fall into chaos. To go beyond resilience and actually enter a
virtuous cycle that brings sustained improvement requires more wholesale political and economic reform
which we have not yet seen evidence for. ESG CORNER
HIGHLIGHTS OF KEY ESG ISSUES AFFECTING EMERGING MARKETS
COP28
Opinions on the success or failure of COP28, formally known as the 2023 United Nations Climate Change
Conference, vary widely, both from a regional standpoint and across the scientific community. One clear
departure from previous conferences was the official acknowledgement of "fossil fuels" in the final text.
Whether this change will prove fundamental in necessitating the urgent need to act to meet the end goal
1.5C target by 2100 is yet to be seen and will continue to be debated. In this short note we summarize our
key takeaways from the conference:
GLOBAL STOCKTAKE
COP28 concluded the first "Global Stocktake", a process to be repeated every five years, which was
established under Article 14 of the Paris Agreement with the aim to assess collective progress in achieving
the Agreement's long-term goals. It involves three stages: (1) collecting data, (2) assessing initial data linked
in with a technical review, and (3) political considerations. The first Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) synthesis report paints an underwhelming picture. Global temperatures are projected to rise between
2.4 to 2.6C, an improvement from the 3.03.2C estimated at the Paris Agreements. However, the report
warns that the opportunity to limit warming to 1.5 C is diminishing due to inadequate progress. If all current
NDCs are fully implemented, global CO2 emissions would exceed the amount needed to limit global warming
to 1.5C by 20.3-23.9 gigatonnes (or 12.5 to 16.0 gigatonnes for a 2.0C target). The UN's 2023 Annual
Emissions Gap Report reinforces that a significant amount of work is required to achieve a target of 1.5C to
2C, each requiring a reduction in 2030 global GHG emissions between 28 per cent and 42 per cent
respectively.
THE UAE CONSENSUS
Political consideration of the output from the NDC synthesis report led to the Global Stocktake outcomes
referred to as the "UAE Consensus, which in turn should guide the next set of more ambitious NDCs.
Highlights from the text are as follows:
 Calls for transitioning away from fossil fuels in energy systems, in a just, orderly and equitable
manner, accelerating action in this critical decade, so as to achieve net zero by 2050 in keeping with
the science: this statement sparked the ongoing debate on whether it should have had a stronger
phrase such as "phase out" to underline the commitment required to achieving the goal. We would
argue that even with the watered-down term, it sets a positive direction going forwards;
 Calls for tripling renewable energy capacity globally and doubling the global average annual rate of
energy efficiency improvements by 2030: Also supported by a list of zero- and low-emission
technologies, in addition to a Declaration to Triple Nuclear Energy. However, as the 2023 World
Nuclear Industry Status Report points out, such pledges may be counterproductive. In 2022, and for
the first time, China generated more energy through solar than nuclear power in 2022. Given the
long lead times to build a nuclear power plant and the growing investment in renewables,
the feasibility of this pledge is unknown.
 Recognizes that transitional fuels can play a role in facilitating the energy transition while ensuring
energy security: "Transitional fuels" likely refers to natural gas. While some fear this could be
exploited as a loophole, it could benefit countries such as Senegal in Sub-Saharan Africa, that are
Past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results.
seeking to improve their energy security. This flexibility could help countries develop economically
and transition to more efficient energy sources as defined within their economic cycle;
 Calls for accelerating and substantially reducing non-carbon-dioxide emissions globally, including
methane, by 2030: Given methanes potency compared to carbon dioxide and its near third
contribution to current global warming, it is likely to feature in the updated NDCs as its risks become
more appreciated.
CARBON FINANCING AND MARKETS
The continued failure of developed countries to jointly mobilize USD 100 billion was flagged with deep
regret, with the text reiterating the need to meet this goal through to 2025. Based on preliminary 2022 data,
it seems that this goal will be achieved for the first time. At COP28, further progress was made on the
financial front. On the first day of the conference, the Loss and Damage fund was made operational,
securing USD 792 million of early pledges from a number of countries. However, this is a small amount
considering that estimates put financing needs nearer USD 390 billion per year to 2030, which is 50% higher
than previous estimates. Additional commitments were made to the Green Climate Fund and the Adaptation
Fund, and multilateral funding was also committed. One of the key agenda items for COP29, to be held in
Baku, Azerbaijan, will be the agreement of a New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG) to be agreed before
2025, with a floor of USD 100 billion per year, aiming to take into account the needs and priorities of
developing countries. Carbon markets are also set to feature, as progress on operationalizing Article 6 of
the Paris Agreement has stalled.
OUR TAKEAWAYS
While the UAE Consensus showed that diplomacy across many various views and interests works, key issues
continue to stand out, particularly, the urgent need for financing, the timescale for the transition, and more
importantly, political will. Aside from the latter, which could be negatively impacted by the huge election
calendar that we have entered and potential detrimental changes in climate policies as a result, the key issue
is time and concerns of delaying action.
Climate risks continue to increase for vulnerable Emerging Market countries and as a result, while COP28
did make some headways across the board, it is imperative that sovereigns pursue and push their own
agenda to finely balance economic growth and the move to more renewable technologies. Following the
shock of Covid-19, increasing inflationary pressures, and supply shocks due to the Russo-Ukrainian war,
vulnerable EMs public finances have been placed under further strain, and with it the rollout of policies with
relation to mitigation and adaptation. To highlight an example of the risks countries face, the 2023 AfDB
African Economic Performance and Outlook report claims that such shocks have pushed 15 million more
Africans into extreme poverty, adding to adaptation pressures. As noted in our recent white paper Revisiting
the case for Emerging Markets, "countries are diverse, with varying growth paths, policies, vulnerabilities,
and ultimately, performance. Treating them uniformly risks overlooking this diversity. While developed
nations are eager to phase out or down fossil fuels, many EM countries are at different economic life cycles.
A forced transition to a renewable framework could be detrimental to their economic development given the
financing and support that is required, which is currently nowhere close to being met. We live in an
environment where global supply chains are established. We believe that we should make use of them,
allowing EM countries to embrace fossil fuels in a less carbon-intensive manner - supporting their
developmental goals, while also investing in supporting a push to expand their renewable footprint in which
a nation has a competitive advantage. Continued support for disaster resilience should be encouraged, as
sovereign states can be slow to improve their own mitigation measures, whether it is due to political will or
funding gaps. This also goes hand-in-hand with continued sovereign engagement to ensure sustainability
commitments are not just declarations on paper. Finally, we note that ESG benchmarks need to be careful
in how they ascertain the progress that a sovereign has made towards decarbonizing. This could result in an
unfair treatment of a sovereigns index weight, which could again, preclude them from much-needed
financing.
